Mikasa appears for the first time in year 845 somewhere inside Wall Maria. She is seen waking Eren up, telling him that they need to return to home. She is surprised to see tears in his eyes and asks why he was crying. On their way home, they meet Hannes. Mikasa watches as Eren complains about the soldiers slacking off while on duty. Later, both Eren and Mikasa watch the return of the Survey Corps forces, witnessing yet another failure of their expedition. After returning home, Mikasa tells on Eren, revealing to his parents his desire to join the Survey Corps. Annoyed, Eren leaves, with Mikasa following him. They save Armin, who is being beaten by local bullies and together discuss their desire to go outside the Walls.

At that moment, the three kids witness the sudden appearance of an extremely tall Titan peering over the top of Wall Maria. The three are stunned to see one that large, only coming back to their senses when the Titan breaches the Wall's gate. Mikasa and Eren run back to their home to find it crushed and Carla trapped under the debris. In spite of their attempts, Mikasa and Eren are unable to free her, Hannes rescues them as a Titan devours Eren's mother. Mikasa and Eren are placed on a ship just as the Armored Titan breaks through the inner gate, letting the Titans inside Wall Maria. She witnesses Eren's vow to kill all the Titans as they are transported to safety.


After the events of the Wall Maria's destruction, the government's desperate attempt to reclaim the lands using the refugees leads to nothing but more casualties. This prompts Mikasa, Eren, and Armin to enroll with the army and become members of the 104th Training Corps.

During their training, Mikasa helps Eren as much as she can as he initially fails to grasp the basics of the vertical maneuvering equipment. They manage to pass the qualifying tests, Mikasa quickly proving her skills and is praised as one of the best trainees in military history. At one point, Mikasa asks Annie Leonhart, a fellow trainee with exceptional skill, to teach her a self-defense technique that she was teaching Eren, which eventually calls for a bet with the 104th Training Corps to see who is the stronger fighter. Their fight is eventually interrupted by an instructor, and ends in a draw.

At the 104th Training Corps' graduation, she is ranked first in the class.

As the Survey Corps parade through the street on its way to the gates, Mikasa, Eren and Armin stare at Captain Levi in amazement.

Later that day, before having the chance to fully apply in the Survey Corps so she can keep Eren safe, the Colossus Titan breaches Wall Rose the same way it did with Wall Maria. Much to her dismay, Mikasa is assigned to the rear guard to help fend off the Titans while the civilians escape into the safety of Wall Sheena. Before fulfilling her duty, she makes Eren promise her not to do anything reckless.

Later on, as an abnormal Titan approaches the escaping civilians who are blocked at the gate. Mikasa kills it, saving everyone. She then witnesses why the civilians are taking too long to escape; an overloaded cargo cart is blocking the way. Mikasa asks the businessman to move the cart so that the people could escape, but when he refuses, she has to resort threatening him after knocking his guards unconscious, which scares the man enough to relent and move his goods. Seeing a mother and daughter show their gratitude for saving them, Mikasa flashes back to the time she lost her own parents and realizes that Eren is the only family she has left. With the evacuation of Trost District citizens complete, she heads to the front guard in order to aid her comrades.

Mikasa finds that, because the supply team has barricaded itself inside the military headquarters, the surviving trainees no longer have enough gas to retreat. Noticing that Eren is not present, Mikasa confronts Armin and learns that Eren was devoured by a Titan. Despite his clear regret, Mikasa calmly comforts Armin and explains that they must not get emotional in their present predicament. Mikasa rallies the remaining trainees and leads them in a last ditch effort to reach the headquarters.

Because of her grief over Eren's death, Mikasa rushes ahead of her comrades and quickly expends all of her gas, stranding herself in the middle of Trost. As two Titans close in on her, she contemplates giving up but is motivated to keep fighting by memories of Eren. When Mikasa stands up to kill the Titan in front of her, another Titan comes running from behind and saves her. This Titan, which ignores Mikasa, gives Armin enough time to rescue Mikasa and they both continue heading to the supply HQ. As they watch the Attack Titan continue killing other Titans, they hatch a plan to lure it to the HQ and relieve the siege there. With its help, the trainees manage to successfully refill their gas tanks and have clear access to the Wall.

However, as they watch the Attack Titan dispose of the last Titans surrounding them, Eren appears out the nape of its neck. Overcome with relief that Eren is alive, Mikasa quickly rescues and embraces him, everyone leaving for the Wall. However, Jean, along with Annie, Reiner, and Bertolt are ordered to hand Eren over to superior officers under the command of Kitz Weilman and to treat the incident as something confidential. Their refusal to do so causes Mikasa and her friends to be accused of treason and find themselves surrounded by Captain Weilman's men, who are prompt to execute them. Mikasa attempts to defend Eren by drawing her blades and threatening to kill anyone who would try to harm Eren, but witnessing Eren's Titan form fighting in Trost District, Weilman does not hesitate and orders a cannon to fire at them in spite of the latter's claim that he is a human. Eren uses his power to block the cannonball and tries to think of a plan of escape. He proposes that they either try to flee over the Walls and escape into the Titan territory or have Armin attempt to persuade the soldiers to spare them, leaving him to choose. Armin tries his best to convince the soldiers that Eren's Titan abilities could help to save humanity, but realizes the commander is far too scared to think rationally. Before the order can be given to fire upon them once more, they are saved when Commander Dot Pixis, head administrator of the southern region, intervenes. They are sent on a mission to plug the breach in the Wall with a rock that only Eren in Titan form can lift.

As the mission commences and Eren goes into Titan form, he loses control and attacks Mikasa before eventually knocking himself out. The elite team, led by Ian Dietrich, Rico Brzenska and Mitabi Jarnach, designated to defend Eren as he carries the rock quarrel among themselves about what to do next. Mikasa is on the verge of attacking them until Ian orders everyone to continue protecting Eren until he recovers. Thanks to Armin's intervention, Eren eventually regains his senses and successfully places the rock down, albeit with many casualties. At that moment, they are saved by Levi as he kills the Titans approaching them.

After the battle of Trost District is over, Eren is brought before a military tribunal to decide his future. Despite Mikasa's best efforts to defend him, she is forced to testify against Eren as his reckless actions have frightened many people in the courtroom. She is also forced to watch helplessly as Eren is assaulted and humiliated by Levi.

Some time later, Mikasa and everyone else have their vertical maneuvering equipment inspected in order to find out the culprit who killed the two captured Titans. Later on, Commander Erwin Smith comes to recruit new members for the Survey Corps which is scheduling an expedition within a few months. Many leave except for Mikasa, Reiner, Armin, Sasha, Krista, Ymir, Connie, Jean, Bertolt and a few others.

Mikasa is then seen to be a part of the 57th expedition. Shortly after leaving for Wall Maria, the Female Titan appears and defeats numerous Survey Corps members. The formation eventually reaches the Titan Forest, with Mikasa being stationed at its outskirts, making sure that no Titans enter the forest. As the Corps is preparing to return to Wall Rose, Mikasa hears the roar of Eren's Titan and abandons her post to go and help him.

Mikasa finds Eren just in time to see the Female Titan defeat and devour him. After overcoming her initial shock, Mikasa begins an enraged assault on the Female Titan, cutting it up to try to rescue Eren. Her attacks prove to be ineffectual against the Titan until she is joined by Levi. Mikasa insists that Eren is still alive and Levi agrees to help rescue him. With Levi coordinating their attacks, they quickly overwhelm the Titan but Mikasa becomes reckless and attempts to kill the Titan against Levi's orders. Levi is wounded saving her from the Titan, but manages to cut open its jaw in the process. Mikasa retrieves Eren from the Titan's mouth and the group retreats.

Following the Survey Corps's failure, Armin manages to convince Annie to help them out until they can gather evidence to prove to the King that the Walls need to be protected better. During that time, Mikasa takes a notice of the lack of diligence and honor in the Military Police. She prepares for battle when she gets fed up with Annie's games and excuses. She takes off her disguise and draws out her sword to fight her, promising to "cut up the Female Titan one more time."

When Eren is unable to initially transform and shows some hesitancy in fighting Annie, Mikasa berates him and decides to go with Armin to distract Annie until Eren is able to transform. Eventually Eren arrives and starts to fight Annie, but it is made apparent that he is not powerful enough to defeat Annie by himself. Being the strongest and most powerful soldier herself, she decides to take the fight to her. Despite being ordered to pull away by Hange Zoë, Mikasa manages to make it to Annie as she attempted to climb over Wall Sheena to escape to the flat lands. Since Annie had already climbed more than halfway towards the top of the Wall, Eren throws Mikasa upwards so she can catch up with the Female Titan, and cut off all her fingers. She then proceeds to push Annie off to fall to the ground. Annie is therefore captured, but encases herself in a crystal to avoid interrogation. However, it was far from over as Mikasa has just taken noticed of a Titan inside the Wall. As both the Survey Corps and Military Police take an encased Annie underground to detain her, Mikasa realizes the Titan hiding in Wall Sheena is alive, but is too weak to move due to a lack of sunlight. Mikasa remains at Eren's bedside as Armin and Jean head down to a meeting involving Erwin and the Military Police.